# Four_Year_NBA_Records

A brief walkthrough of modern basketball history through the lens of 4-year records. 

"There is winning and there is misery" - Bill Parcells

"Back in my day, XXX was better than this YYY". *Collective groan from anyone 30 years old or younger*. Without exaggeration, I think it is fair to say that we have all heard a phrase of this sort at least once in our lives. Some nostalgic man thinking back to "the good old days" in a way that simultaneously disparages the present. Personally, I have heard this line used most frequently in the context of music and professional basketball. While I may be willing to agree with the idea that the 80s was the golden age of music, I completely disagree with this logic as it pertains to basketball.

Consider the 4-year record of NBA teams since the adoption of the 82-game schedule in 1968. If we sort in descending order by wins (Fig. 1) or plot a distribution of wins (Fig 2.), we can see one team emerge. The mid 2010's Golden State Warriors accumulated 265 wins and won 3 of 4 NBA championships (and came within a difficult Kyrie Irving step back 3 pointer of winnning 4 of 4). This is 14 more wins than the second and third highest. Relative to their competition, no NBA team has ever been as dominant as the mid 2010s Golden State Warriors. Note, this is not solely because of the addition of Kevin Durant. The Warriors won the 2015 championship and the most regular season games (73) prior to acquiring Durant - a decision that ultimately solidified the Warriors as a nearly invincible juggernaut. 

In the early 70s, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Oscar Robertson led the Milwuakee Bucks to 248 wins and solidified themselves as one of the top 1% of all teams in basketball history. While dominant, they would only win 1 NBA championship during that stretch. 

If an old-timer wanted to argue in favor of the apparent parity amongst the top teams, then they may have an argument in the 1980s. At their peaks, the Boston Celtics and Los Angeles Lakers each accumulated 251 wins over 4 seasons (tied for second all-time as of today) and faced each other in 3 epic finals (1984, 1986, and 1987). The 76ers also established themselves as a dominant force in the early 80s and have the 1983 NBA championship to show for it. 

In the 90s, the Chicago Bulls dominated the NBA and accumulated 250 wins at their 4-year peak. Their closest competition during this stretch were the mid 90s Seattle Supersonics and Utah Jazz each with 241 wins. Importantly, the Seattle Supersonics and the Utah Jazz are the first teams on the top __ list who did not win championships. 

In the 2000s, the Spurs and Lakers accounted for 7 of the 10 championships while the mid 2000s Mavericks and Spurs became the next 2 teams to amass 230+ wins but fail to win a championship (although the Mavericks would win the 2011 NBA championship soon after). 

In the 2010s, the Spurs continued their success and remained in the top_ list, but were soon joined by the mid 2000s Golden State Warriors. 

One of the great present day NBA basketball debates is whoo is the greatest basketball player of all time, Michael Jordan or LeBron James? Even for objective, basktball pundits this isn't an easy question as it often comes down to what their team needs. If we look at accomplishments to answer the question, Jordan won 6 championships, 5 league MVPs, 10 scoring titles, and 1 defensive player of the year award (DPOY).Michael Jordan also prevented other historically great NBA teams from winning championships (in particular the Seattle Supersonics and the Utah Jazz). 

On the other hand, LeBron James has only won 4 championships, 4 league MVPs, 1 scoring title and 0 DPOYs. Furthermore, LeBron could not prevent historically great teams from winning as Jordan had done as he is just 2-5 against them all-time. Clearly, Michael Jordan is the more accomplished NBA basketball player. However, the reason this doesn't necessarily translate to the greatest NBA player of all time is that it is completely devoid of all context. Michael Jordan was on historically great teams himself where as LeBron wasn't. In fact, in the 5 losses to those teams his team was favored in none of them. Interestingly, The Cleveland Cavaliers achieved their 2 best 4-year stretches prior to LeBron's departure to Miami and after his return. The Cavaliers accumulated 222 and 211 wins during those stretches placing them in the upper-echeleon of teams - although far from historically great. In his 4 year return, the Cleveland Cavaliers made it to the finals 4 consecutive years winning 1 of them and losing the other 3 to the aforementioned Warriors team. In the 4 year abscense, they amassed just 94 wins and accumulated 3 of the possible 4 number 1 overall picks. In the mid 90s, the Chicago Bulls managed to win 243 wins despite a 1.5 year hiatus from Michael Jordan, implying that the Bulls were an elite team even without Jordan. In fact, Chicago Bulls fans will often remind people that the 1994 Bulls were a missed call away from a 4th consecutuive trip to the NBA finals despite the departure of Michael Jordan that season.  Advanced statistics such as RAPM support the notion that LeBron impacts winning more than any other player in NBA history, but the departure / arrival of both players from teams reinforces this. 

Let's examine some of the worst teams in NBA history as well. The first is the 90s Vancouver/Memphis Grizzlies who managed to win just 56 games in the mid 90s. In fairness to them, they were an expansion team and joined the NBA in 1995. The post Jordan-Pippen-Rodman-Jackson era was not a good one for the Bulls as they managed just 66 wins in the early 2000s. Fortunately for Bulls fans, this period could not take away what they had done during the 90s. Some other notable mentions on this list were the mid 2000s Sixers, who were unabashed in their attempts to tank to stock-pile draft picks and build for the future even selling it to their fans with the motto, "Trust the process". Despite some very strong Sixers teams in the late 2010s and early 2020's, they are yet to even make it to the conference finals let alone with the NBA championship. 

